# A password generator

Create a file named `pass` and type the following code into it.

{{correct-horse-battery-staple}}

To run this program, you need to make it e**x**ecutable using the command
`chmod +x pass`. Then you can run it by typing `./pass` and pressing
<kbd>Enter</kbd>.

It prints out a password when you run it. It prints out the same password every
time, but we'll fix that soon enough.

The first line (`#!/usr/bin/env bash`) is called a
[shebang](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shebang_(Unix)) line. (`#` is a hash
character, and `!` is a bang character, so together they form a hash-bang, or
shebang for short.) The shebang line allows you to run scripts the same way you
run binaries, so you can type `./pass` instead of `bash pass`. When the OS
goes to execute a file that begins with `#!`, it runs the program that comes
after the `#!` instead, and passes the file to that program as an argument. So
if the `pass` script began with `#!/bin/bash`, it would be executed using
`/bin/bash pass`.

However, the `bash` program might not be located at `/bin/bash` on all systems.
To make `pass` more portable, the `env` program is used. `env` is a program
that runs the given command, optionally in a modified **env**ironment. It is
used in shebang lines because it runs commands similar to how commands are run
on the shell: it looks in your `$PATH` to locate the command you gave. So with
a shebang line of `#!/usr/bin/env bash`, the `bash` command will be located
properly, wherever it may be on your system.

The reason you can't use something like `#!bash`, and expect it to use `$PATH`
to find `bash` like a shell command would, is that shebang scripts are
[handled by the OS](https://lwn.net/Articles/630727/) at a very
[low level](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/fs/binfmt_script.c?v=3.18).

`bash` stands for **B**ourne-**a**gain **sh**ell, which was written to replace
the [Bourne shell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bourne_shell) (`sh`). `bash`
is very widely available, and is the default shell on most Unix systems.

So that's line 1.

Moving on to line 3, we have an `echo` command. `echo` is a
program that just prints out the command line arguments it is given. We give it
a quoted argument. The shell
[removes the quotes](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/Quote-Removal.html)
before passing the argument to `echo`, and `echo` prints the password to the
standard output.

## Variables

Let's try assigning the password to a variable, and printing out the variable.

{{variable}}

When the first word of a line contains an `=` character, it is interpreted as
an assignment statement instead of a command. There must not be any whitespace
around the `=`. If you wrote `pass = "correcthorsebatterystaple"`, then Bash
would try to execute a program named `pass` and pass it the arguments `=` and
`correcthorsebatterystaple`.

Once again, the quotes around `"correcthorsebatterystaple"` are not necessary.
The quotes are removed before assigning the value to the variable.

When a `$` precedes a variable name, as in `echo "$pass"`, the variable is
expanded to whatever its value is. It's good practice to put double quotes
around variable expansions, as it ensures that the expanded value is passed as
a single argument. If `$pass` contained the value `a b c`, then `echo $pass`
would expand to `echo a b c`, while `echo "$pass"` would expand to
`echo "a b c"` which is usually what you want.

## Generating a random string

Now let's actually generate a random password each time the program is run.

{{urandom}}

There's a lot going on in this one-liner. Let's see how to build this one-liner
incrementally, using the shell interactively:

```bash
$ cat /dev/urandom
```

(The `$` is just a prompt to show that the command is to be typed at the shell,
so for this example you want to type `cat /dev/urandom`.)

[`/dev/random`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki//dev/random) is a special device
file that produces an infinite stream of random bytes. If it doesn't have
enough environmental noise to generate cryptographically secure random numbers,
then it will [block](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blocking_(computing)) until
until it does. `/dev/urandom` is an alternative to `/dev/random` that never
blocks, at the cost of being possibly slightly less random. It is still
intended to be used for cryptographic purposes though, so `pass` uses
`/dev/urandom` as its source of randomness.

You'll get a lot of garbage output from the above command because a lot of the
bytes won't be printable ASCII characters. Press <kbd>Ctrl-C</kbd> to make it
stop.

```bash
$ LC_ALL=C tr -dc "[:graph:]" < /dev/urandom
```

This command uses [`tr`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tr_(Unix)) to remove all
the non-**graph**ical characters from the random stream of bytes. A graphical
character is any ordinary ASCII character that isn't whitespace. `tr` is
typically used to **tr**anslate characters, as in `tr 013 ole <<<h3110`. The
`-d` option makes it delete certain characters instead. `[:graph:]` is a
character class meaning "any graphical character", and the `-c` option inverts
that argument, so that the command deletes all **non**-graphical characters.

The command is preceded by the variable assignment `LC_ALL=C`. This sets the
[locale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_localization_functions) to the `C`
locale for the duration of the `tr` command. The `C` locale is a simple locale
that treats characters as bytes. The default locale is probably based on UTF-8,
which causes `tr` to fail when reading from `/dev/urandom`, complaining about
an illegal byte sequence.

We use `<` to
[redirect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Redirection_(computing)) the standard
input of the `tr` command to be the `/dev/urandom` file.

All that's left to do is to limit the output of the command to, say, 25
characters, and save it in the `$pass` variable. Bash has a built-in command,
`read`, that can do both of these things at once:

```bash
$ read -r -n 25 pass < <(LC_ALL=C tr -dc "[:graph:]" < /dev/urandom)
$ echo $pass
```

`read` is typically used to read input from the user and put it in a variable.
We use a special type of redirection to set the output of our `tr` command as
the standard input for the `read` command. The `-n 25` option causes it to read
25 characters, and the `-r` option signifies "raw" input which disables
backslash-escaping in the input.

The `<(command)` form actually expands to the name of a temporary file,
something like `/dev/fd/63`. Try running `echo <(ls)` to see what `<(ls)` gets
expanded to. The file is a
[named pipe](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Named_pipe), which is a special type
of file that only exists in memory (not on disk). In the `echo <(ls)` example,
what the shell does is it creates a named pipe, sets the `ls` command's
standard output to be that named pipe, and then replaces `<(ls)` with the
filename of the named pipe. This allows us to read the `ls` command's output
however we want. For example, `cat < <(ls)` expands to something like
`cat < /dev/fd/63`, and causes `cat` to use the output of the `ls` command as
its standard input.

Most of the time, you would use anonymous pipes in the shell, as they have a
much cleaner syntax. For example, you would write `ls | cat` instead of
`cat < <(ls)` to pipe the output of `ls` to `cat`. But this does not work when
piping input to `read`. Try `echo asdf | read -r test`, and then `echo $test`.
You'll see that `$test` is empty instead of containing the string `asdf`.
That's because with anonymous pipes, each command is
[run in a separate subshell](http://mywiki.wooledge.org/BashFAQ/024). So `read`
sets the `$test` variable in its own subshell's environment, but that
environment isn't available to you and disappears when `read` finishes
executing. A named pipe fixes this issue by having `read` run in the current
shell's environment: `read -r test < <(echo asdf)`.

## Environment variables

Next, let's allow the user to configure the password's length and character
set using environment variables.

{{env-variables}}

The `${varname:-defaultvalue}` form is a variable expansion that expands to
`defaultvalue` if the `$varname` variable is empty or unset, otherwise it
expands to the value of `$varname`. So if the user doesn't set the
`PASSWORD_STORE_GENERATED_LENGTH` environment variable, then the
`GENERATED_LENGTH` will be `25` by default. Similarly, the default value of
`CHARACTER_SET` will be `[:graph:]`, if `PASSWORD_STORE_CHARACTER_SET` is
unset.

These environment variables can be passed into our script using the built-in
`export` command:

```bash
$ export PASSWORD_STORE_GENERATED_LENGTH=8
$ export PASSWORD_STORE_CHARACTER_SET=abcdef
$ ./pass
beaebdfe
```

In practice, the user would put these `export` statements into their
[startup file](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/Bash-Startup-Files.html)
(e.g. `~/.bashrc`). The `export` command simply marks the given variable to be
exported into the environment of every command that is executed from then on.

A quick-and-dirty way of passing environment variables to a command is to
precede the command with one or more assignment statements, as we saw before
with `LC_ALL=C tr …`:

```bash
$ PASSWORD_STORE_GENERATED_LENGTH=4 PASSWORD_STORE_CHARACTER_SET=[:digit:] ./pass
5742
```

In this case, the two variables only ever exist in the `./pass` command's
environment. If the variables already exist in the shell's environment, they
will be overridden but not overwritten by these variable assignments.

By convention, names of environment variables are uppercase, and variables
local to the script are lowercase. In `pass`, the convention is that only
variables local to functions are lowercase, and global variables (like
`GENERATED_LENGTH`) are uppercase. (We're going to make the `$pass` variable
local to a function in the next step.)

Notice that `$GENERATED_LENGTH` isn't quoted in the `read` command. That is OK
because we expect it to just be an integer with no whitespace. Later on, we'll
validate it to make sure it is just an integer.

## Functions

Let's wrap our password-generating code in a function.

{{function}}

A function definition consists of a name (`cmd_generate`), a pair of parens,
and a function body. The parens are always empty, they are just there to say
"this is a function definition". After defining the function, we call it by
running it like we'd run any other command.

Inside functions, local variables can be declared using the `local` built-in
command. Local variables are only visible inside the function they are declared
in.

The user interface of `pass` is based on commands. For example, to generate a
password, the user should type `./pass generate` to run the `generate` command.
That is why the function is called `cmd_generate()`: `cmd` stands for
**c**o**m**man**d**, and it implements the `generate` command.

## The `generate` command

Let's make it so that `cmd_generate()` is only run when the user runs
`./pass generate`.

{{command}}

Each command line argument passed to our script is available as a special
numeric variable called a
[positional parameter](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/Positional-Parameters.html).
`$1` gives you the first argument, `$2` gives you the second argument, and so
on.

The `if` statement checks if the value of `$1` is `generate`. If so, it runs
`cmd_generate()`. Otherwise, it prints an error message. Either a `;` or a
newline is required before the `then` keyword, to separate it from the `if`
condition. The `fi` keyword marks the end of the `if` statement. Yes, that is
just `if` spelled backwards, which
[comes from the ALGOL68 language](https://unix.stackexchange.com/a/256175).

You can put any command between the `if` and the `;`. If the command returns a
`0` exit status, then the body of the `if` statement will run, otherwise the
`else` body will run if it exists. `[[…]]` is just a built-in command that
evalutes boolean expressions and returns a `0` exit status if the expression
evalutes to true.

If you look in your `/bin` directory, you may see a program named `[`. This is
what shell scripts used to use in `if` statements before `[[…]]` became
commonplace. Because `[` is just an ordinary program, it doesn't support
C-style boolean operators like `&&` and `||` (those characters have special
meaning to the shell, so they'd have to be escaped). You would have to use `-a`
instead of `&&`, and `-o` instead of `||`. The `[[…]]` built-in allows you to
write much more readable and complex boolean expressions in your `if`
statements.

## The `version` command

Now let's add a `version` command that prints out information about the
program.

{{version}}

`elif` is short for "else if". We allow the user to run either `./pass version`
or the more common `./pass --version`, to show the version information.

The version information is displayed using a
[here document](http://tldp.org/LDP/abs/html/here-docs.html) (heredoc).
Heredocs are a way of redirecting a multiline string into a program's standard
input, in this case `cat` which just prints out the string. An ordinary heredoc
starts with `<<` and is followed by an identifier. Then every line of text
after that is part of the string until the line that contains the identifier by
itself.

In this case, the identifier is `_EOF` and the heredoc is introduced with an
extra hyphen (`<<-`), which causes the initial tab characters on each line to
be ignored. (Make sure you use actual tab characters when typing in those
lines!) `_EOF` stands for "end of file" and is a common identifier used in
heredocs.

As you can see in the version message, the version of `pass` we are building is
`v1.7`, it was written by [Jason A. Donenfeld](https://www.zx2c4.com/), and its
homepage is [passwordstore.org](http://www.passwordstore.org/).

## `case` statements

We should replace our `if … elif … else` chain with a more concise `case`
statement (similar to `switch` statements in C-like languages).

{{case}}

The expression `"$1"` is matched against each pattern to the left of each `)`.
Multiple patterns are separated by a `|` character. When a pattern matches, the
commands to the right of the `)` are run, until the `;;` is hit which
terminates the whole `case` statement. Patterns can include wildcards like `?`
(which matches any single character) and `*` (which matches any number of
characters). The `*` pattern at the end can be thought of as an `else` branch,
but it is really just another pattern that happens to match absolutely
anything.

## The `help` command

Let's add a `help` command that prints out usage information to the user.

{{help}}

It's not that different from the `version` command. The first thing
`cmd_usage()` does is run `cmd_version()`, so we get a nice ASCII box with the
program's information at the top. Then an `echo` command with no arguments
causes a newline to be output. Finally we print the usage information using
`cat` and a heredoc.

The
[special parameter]([https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/Special-Parameters.html)
`$0` expands to the name of the script that is being executed. In our case,
this is `pass`, or `./pass`. It's basically whatever you type in the shell to
run the script. We assign this value to the global variable `$PROGRAM`, and use
it in the heredoc.

Let's remove any directories in the program's path, so that `$PROGRAM` only
contains the program's name. That way it'll display `pass` instead of `./pass`.

{{program-name}}

`##` expansion

{{generate-length}}

function arguments

{{pass-length-usage}}

.

{{arguments}}

$@, shift

{{die}}

redirection to stderr, $@, failure exit status

{{validate-length}}

not operator, regex operator, regex, `[[ ... ]] &&` idiom

{{validate-pass}}

string length expansion, arithmetic operators, `[[ ... ]] ||` idiom

